a once crystal-clear River now runs a
luminous yellow orange the toxic legacy
of Colorado's mining past is wending its
way down one of the state's most
beautiful valleys the yellow color is
harmless iron but the three million
gallons of sludge is also rich in lead
arsenic cadmium and Mercury all toxic
some carcinogenic the scale of this
environmental disaster has overwhelmed
authorities and outraged locals I wonder
what's gonna happen to the fish
I wonder what's going to happen to the
animals to the wild life to the
vegetation and how long this is going to
take to go away they're angry Estill
because the accident was caused by the
US Environmental Protection Agency
itself
last week its staff were investigating
how to reduce leaks from the king gold
mine closed in 1923 instead they caused
a collapse and one of the biggest
pollution events in recent memory so it
pains me to no end to see this as
happening but we're working tirelessly
to respond and we've committed to full
review of exactly what happened to
ensure that it can never happen again
tests on fish and other wildlife of so
far shown little impact but this river
runs straight through the 27,000 square
mile Navajo Nation its leader has
threatened legal action after visiting
the scene of the disaster we call an
emergency - this is an emergency
situation for our Navajo
and the water first through here and it
just went straight down the mountain
down here that you saw pictures up
straight down and and it went like that
state officials have halted drinking
water supplies from the river but
distrustful residents are bringing their
own samples for testing using river
water for irrigating crops is under
urgent review while many metals settle
into sediments others can end up in food
soluble cadmium has a propensity to get
into plants very easily so that's what
makes it dangerous it's also
carcinogenic and it produces renal
damage birth defects it's it's a really
bad thing to to take in the upper
reaches of the river are now clearing as
the remaining toxic metals make their
way downstream it will meet the Colorado
River eventually carrying this accident
in a remote mountain Creek right through
America's greatest natural monument the
Grand Canyon itself
you